# Code for the paper `How long should a block be?`

This repository contains pointers to the functions used in Belzile and Davison (2026+).

The datasets used in the applications can be obtained from the **R** package [`mev`](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/mev/index.html) (version 2.2 and above) under `cheeseborowind`, `abisko` and `thames`, and can be loaded via the commands

```{r}
data(thames, package = "mev")
data(cheeseborowind, package = "mev")
data(abisko, package = "mev")
```

Functions from package `mev` that are used in the paper include notably:

- `rmar1` simulates series from a first-order max-autoregressive process with non-negative shape parameter.
- `build.blocks` takes a time series, calculates maxima of `block` consecutive observations and builds a matrix with blocks of size `m`, ordered by row.
- `test.blocksize` implements the likelihood ratio tests.
- `qqplot.blocksize` generates uniform quantile-quantile plots for the maximum, set of block maxima or the range with pointwise and simultaneous binomial-based confidence intervals for the positions, obtained using a parametric bootstrap.
- `fit.gevblock` returns maximum likelihood estimates for the model with potential interval-censoring and left-censoring, also using the marginal likelihood of the $m-1$ lower order statistics.

The script `helpers.R` contains functions for the power study, including

- `rdistmax` for simulating from the maximum of `m` observations from a parametric distribution `dist`.
- `sim_alt` for simulating data from a GEV where the largest observation of a block of size $m$ is drawn from a different distribution.
- `sim_alt_mda` for simulating data from the maximum of `m` observations from a parametric distribution, mimicking `sim_alt`.
- `simu_fn` for running the simulation study for independent data drawn from a GEV
- `simu_fn_mda` for running the simulation study with independent data drawn from the max domain of attraction.
- `simu_fn_st` for running the simulation study with first-order max-autoregressive data with GEV margins.
- `autoplot.mev_plot_block` for generating `ggplot2` graphs for the probability-probability plots, as generated by `qqplot.blocksize`.

Several scripts for generating the results presented in the paper, including

- `tests-efficiency.R` for calculation of the relative efficiency of the marginal likelihood of the $m-1$ smallest order statistics out of $m$.
- `tests-marginal-likelihood.R` for calculating the sampling distribution of the MLE for the data with full likelihood, marginal likelihood, and marginal likelihood together with additional support constraints.

For power studies, we use the `simsalapar` package and the following scripts

- `power-study-1-GEV.R` for the independent and identically distributed case;
- `power-study-2-MDA.R` for max domain of attraction case (with Gumbel and normal);
- `power-study-3-MAR.R` for max-autoregressive processes ;
- `power-study-4-MAR.R` for block maxima of max-autoregressive processes. 

Code for reproducing the data applications can be found in

- `application-Cheeseboro.R` for the wind gust semicentennial maximum in Cheeseboro, California, USA.
- `application-Thames.R` for the river flow at Kingston, UK.
- `application-Abisko.R` for the probability of landslide-triggering rainfall episodes in Abisko, Sweden.

Code for reproducing additional figures can be found in

- `plot-penultimate.R` for the penultimate parameters of Gaussian and Weibull, along with their max-stable extrapolation.
- `plot-MAR.R` for the first-order max-autoregressive simulation and comparison of location parameters relative to independent data.
